# Where Did Refactoring Come From?

I’ve not succeeded in pinning down the birth of the term "refactoring." Good programmers have always spent at least some time cleaning up their code. They do this because they have learned that clean code is easier to change than complex and messy code, and good programmers know that they rarely write clean code the first time around.

Refactoring goes beyond this. In this book, I’m advocating refactoring as a key element in the whole process of software development. Two of the first people to recognize the importance of refactoring were Ward Cunningham and Kent Beck, who worked with Smalltalk from the 1980s onward. Smalltalk is an environment that even then was particularly hospitable to refactoring. It is a very dynamic environment that allows you to quickly write highly functional software. Smalltalk had a very short compile-link-execute cycle for its time, which made it easy to change things quickly at a time where overnight compile cycles were not unknown. It is also object-oriented and thus provides powerful tools for minimizing the impact of change behind well-defined interfaces. Ward and Kent explored software development approaches geared to this kind of environment, and their work developed into Extreme Programming. They realized that refactoring was important in improving their productivity and, ever since, have been working with refactoring, applying it to serious software projects and refining it.

Ward and Kent’s ideas were a strong influence on the Smalltalk community, and the notion of refactoring became an important element in the Smalltalk culture. Another leading figure in the Smalltalk community is Ralph Johnson, a professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, who is famous as one of the authors of the “Gang of Four” book on design patterns. One of Ralph’s biggest interests is in developing software frameworks. He explored how refactoring can help develop an efficient and flexible framework.

Bill Opdyke was one of Ralph’s doctoral students and was particularly interested in frameworks. He saw the potential value of refactoring and saw that it could be applied to much more than Smalltalk. His background was in telephone switch development, in which a great deal of complexity accrues over time and changes are difficult to make. Bill’s doctoral research looked at refactoring from a tool builder’s perspective. Bill was interested in refactorings that would be useful for C++ framework development; he researched the necessary semantics-preserving refactorings and showed how to prove they were semantics-preserving and how a tool could implement these ideas. Bill’s doctoral thesis was the first substantial work on refactoring.

I remember meeting Bill at the OOPSLA conference in 1992. We sat in a café and he told me about his research. I remember thinking, “Interesting, but not really that important.” Boy, was I wrong!

John Brant and Don Roberts took the refactoring tool ideas much further to produce the Refactoring Browser, the first refactoring tool, appropriately for the Smalltalk environment.

And me? I’d always been inclined to clean code, but I’d never considered it to be that important. Then, I worked on a project with Kent and saw the way he used refactoring. I saw the difference it made in productivity and quality. That experience convinced me that refactoring was a very important technique. I was frustrated, however, because there was no book that I could give to a working programmer, and none of the experts above had any plans to write such a book. So, with their help, I did—which led to the first edition of this book.

Fortunately, the concept of refactoring caught on in the industry. The book sold well, and refactoring entered the vocabulary of most programmers. More tools appeared, especially for Java. One downside of this popularity has been people using "refactoring" loosely, to mean any kind of restructuring. Despite this, however, it has become a mainstream practice.
